review filtering guide (#2061)
meilisearch/documentation: learn/advanced/filtering_and_faceted_search.md

]
```

If you want to filter results based on the `director` and `genres` attributes, you must add them to the `filterableAttributes` list:

<CodeSamples id="faceted_search_update_settings_1" />

**This step is mandatory and cannot be done at search time**  because Meilisearch needs to prepare an index before you can use filters. Updating `filterableAttributes` may take a significant amount of time depending on your dataset size.

::: note
By default, `filterableAttributes` is empty. Filters do not work without first explicitly adding attributes to the `filterableAttributes` list.
:::

Filters work with numeric and string values. Empty fields or fields containing an empty array will be ignored.

> Filters do not work with [`NaN`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/NaN) and infinite values such as `inf` and `-inf` as they are [not supported by JSON](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JSON#Data_types). It is possible to filter infinite and `NaN` values if you parse them as strings, except when handling [`_geo` fields](/learn/advanced/geosearch.md#preparing-documents-for-location-based-search).

Reviewer: Some users discovering filters for the first time will simply want to make their first filtered search as quickly as possible. For their sake, anything we can do to condense this section, or otherwise designate this knowledge as skippable in some way, is good.

I would propose putting it under a subheading `Filters & data types` or something like this. That way, people who are not interested know that they can skip and come back to it, and people who are interested are unaffected.

> ## Filter basics

Reviewer: What if we called this `The filter search parameter` or something like that?

I think that the article has a slight problem with heading titles. This is called "Filter basics" but there is no "Advanced use of filters" or equivalent. The following heading is called "Using filters", but this section seems to contain most if not all of the information necessary to use filters. If possible, I would like you to rethink the names of both of these sections, considering what value they will bring to the user. Why would a user want to jump to this section or the other? What would they be looking for?

> Once you have configured `filterableAttributes`, you can use [the `filter` search parameter](/reference/api/search.md#filter). The `filter` search parameter refines search results by selecting documents matching the given filter and running the search query only on those documents.

Reviewer: The second sentence of this paragraph looks like the definition of `filter` / the context that I was looking for at the top of the guide.

For accuracy, I would want to change the first sentence like this. But feel free to reject if you think it complicates the sentence unnecessarily. I just don't want users jumping directly to this heading to think that setting up `filterableAttributes` once means they can use `filter` freely on any of their attributes. Maybe this is obvious!

```suggestion
Once you have designated certain attributes as `filterableAttributes`, you can use [the `filter` search parameter](/reference/api/search.md#filter) to filter your search according to those attributes. The `filter` search parameter refines search results by selecting documents matching the given filter and running the search query only on those documents.
```

::: warning
[Synonyms](/learn/configuration/synonyms.md) don't apply to filters. Meaning, if you have `SF` and `San Francisco` set as synonyms, filtering by `SF` and `San Francisco` will show you different results.

> :::

Reviewer: This does not feel like the best place to put this information. It is not basic and breaks up the flow. I think it might be better in the section that's currently titled "Using filters", which seems simply by its placement further down in the guide to be more advanced, and thus a better place to list exceptions etc..

> `filter` expects a **filter expression** containing one or more **conditions**. A filter expression can be written as a string, array, or as a mix of both.

Reviewer: Grammatical thing! Both are correct:

`A filter expression can be written as a string, as an array, or as a mix of both.`
`A filter expression can be written as a string, array, or mix of both.`

What's important is consistency in the use of `as a`: either you're saying it once to cover the whole list, or you're repeating it each time. Not 100% sure of the name of this rule, but I would consider it a form of **parallel construction**.

```suggestion
`filter` expects a **filter expression** containing one or more **conditions**. A filter expression can be written as a string, array, or mix of both.
```

### Conditions

> Conditions are a filter's basic building blocks. They are always written in the `attribute OPERATOR value` format, where:

Reviewer: Less complex / more natural English

```suggestion
Conditions are the basic building blocks of filters. They are always written in the `attribute OPERATOR value` format, where:
```

Also, isn't `TO` an exception to this format? So maybe we shouldn't say "always"

- `attribute` is the attribute of the field you want to filter on
- `OPERATOR` can be `=`, `!=`, `>`, `>=`, `<`, `<=`, `TO`, `EXISTS`, `IN`, `NOT`, `AND`, or `OR`
- `value` is the value the `OPERATOR` should look for in the `attribute`

> #### Examples

Reviewer: In the above example the genres were capitalized. Perhaps this is a good spot to mention that filters on strings are case-insensitive?

Also, could you remove "Note that" on line 76? It's unnecessary. (_Note that_ I would love to create a Vale rule for this 😉 )

Author: >Perhaps this is a good spot to mention that filters on strings are case-insensitive?

I mentioned this under the equality and inequality operator headings.

]
```

If you want to filter results based on the `director` and `genres` attributes, you must add them to the `filterableAttributes` list:

<CodeSamples id="faceted_search_update_settings_1" />

**This step is mandatory and cannot be done at search time.** Filters need to be properly processed and prepared by Meilisearch before they can be used.

Updating `filterableAttributes` requires recreating the entire index. This may take a significant amount of time depending on your dataset size.

::: note
By default, `filterableAttributes` is empty. This means that filters do not work without first explicitly adding attributes to the `filterableAttributes` list.
:::

> Filters work with numeric and string values. Empty fields or fields containing an empty array will be ignored. Filtering with infinite (`inf` and `-inf`) or [Not a Number](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/NaN) (`NaN`) as numbers will throw an error as they are [not supported by JSON](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JSON#Data_types). Filtering with  `inf` or `NaN` as strings will work for all fields except [geo fields](/learn/advanced/geosearch.md#preparing-documents-for-location-based-search).  

Author: ```suggestion
Filters work with numeric and string values. Empty fields or fields containing an empty array will be ignored. 
	
Filters do not work with [`NaN`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/NaN) and infinite values such as `inf` and `-inf` as they are [not supported by JSON](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JSON#Data_types). It is possible to filter infinite and `NaN` values if you parse them as strings, except when handling [geo fields](/learn/advanced/geosearch.md#preparing-documents-for-location-based-search).
```

genres = horror
```

String values containing whitespace must be enclosed in single or double quotes:

```
director = 'Jordan Peele'
director = "Tim Burton"
```

Another condition could request movies released after 18 March 1995 (written as `795484800` in UNIX Epoch time):

```
release_date > 795484800
```

### Filter operators

Meilisearch supports the following filter operators:

> - [Equality](#equality)
> - [Inequality](#inequality)
> - [Comparison](#comparison)
> - [`EXISTS`](#exists)
> - [`IN`](#in)
> - [`NOT`](#not)
> - [Filter expressions](#filter-expressions)

Reviewer: Or (haha):

```suggestion
- [Equality `=`](#equality)
- [Inequality `!=`](#inequality)
- [Comparison `> < <= >=`](#comparison)
- [`EXISTS`](#exists)
- [`IN`](#in)
- [`NOT`](#not)
```

> - [Filter expressions](#filter-expressions)

Author: No, I guess. You're combining conditions using AND or OR

> - [Filter expressions](#filter-expressions)

Reviewer: Final question: should we add AND and OR to this list (move them from below "filter expressions" section)? They are described as operators at the beginning of the filter basics section.

> - [Filter expressions](#filter-expressions)

Author: I'll add the link

Both of the following expressions are equivalent and return all documents whose `genres` includes either `horror`, `comedy`, or both:

```
genres IN [horror, comedy]
genres = horror OR genres = comedy
```

The negated form of the above expression can be written as:

```
genres NOT IN [horror, comedy]
NOT genres IN [horror, comedy]
```

Both are equivalent and mean:

```
genres != horror AND genres != comedy
```

#### `NOT`

The negation operator (`NOT`) selects all documents that do not satisfy a condition. It has higher precedence than `AND` and `OR`.

The following expression will return all documents whose `genres` does not contain `horror` and documents with a missing `genres` field:

```
NOT genres = horror
```

### Filter expressions

You can build filter expressions by grouping basic conditions using `AND` and `OR`. Filter expressions can be written as strings, arrays, or a mix of both.

::: warning
The [`GET` route of the search endpoint](/reference/api/search.md#search-in-an-index-with-get-route) only accepts string filter expressions.

> :::

Reviewer: If there's a warning about this in the GET search endpoint API reference, then I think we can remove this. It's not specific to filters, it's because GET requests don't accept payloads so everything has to be submitted as a parameter in the route. Also, GET is not very used so all in all, I think it's not worth derailing the topic of the guide.

director = "Tim Burton"
```

Another condition could request movies released after 18 March 1995 (written as `795484800` in UNIX Epoch time):

```
release_date > 795484800
```

::: warning

> Since Meilisearch does not enforce a specific schema when indexing data, the filtering engine will try to coerce the type of `value`. This can lead to undefined behavior when big floats are coerced into integers and reciprocally. For this reason, it is best to have homogeneous typing across fields, especially when dealing with large numbers.

Reviewer: Seems like a great candidate for the aforementioned `Filters & data types` section

:::

### Filter operators

> Meilisearch supports the following filter operators:

Reviewer: I found it difficult to scan this section. It's mainly because our H4s do not jump out a lot—they just look like bolded text, and are even harder to see if they're enclosed in `<code>` tags (although maybe that's just in dark mode).

Maybe add a little linked table of contents here, so that users can quickly jump to the operator they want to learn more about?

#### Equality

> The equality operator (`=`) returns all documents containing an attribute equal to a specific value. When operating on strings, `=` is case-insensitive.

Reviewer: I had to re-read the first sentence a few times. It strikes me as accurate but a tad long/confusing. Any way to simplify it, or break it into multiple sentences? 🤔

Author: Reworded to:
The equality operator (`=`) returns all documents containing a specific value for a given attribute.

> ::: note

Reviewer: Suggest moving the note after the example. **Examples are critical for understanding**

The equality operator does not return any results for `null` and empty arrays.
:::

The following expression returns all action movies:

```
genres = action
```

#### Inequality

The inequality operator (`!=`) returns all documents not selected by the equality operator. When operating on strings, `!=` is case-insensitive.

The following expression returns all movies without the `action` genre:

```
genres != action
```

#### Comparison

The comparison operators (`>`, `<`, `>=`, `<=`, `TO`) select documents satisfying a comparison. Comparison operators only apply only to numerical values.

The expression below returns all documents with a user rating above 85:

```
rating.users > 85
```

> To filter documents with a user rating of 80 or above but below 90, use:

Reviewer: Makes it more clear that it's an example

```suggestion
To filter documents with a user rating of 80 or above but below 90, you would use:
```

[["genres = comedy, genres = horror"], "NOT director = 'Jordan Peele'"]
```

## Filter operators

Meilisearch supports the following filter operators:

::: note
When creating an expression with a field name or value identical to a filter operator such as `AND` or `NOT`, you must wrap it in quotation marks: `title = "NOT" OR title = "AND"`.

> :::

Author: True, but I'm not sure where else to move it. Maybe under "Filter expressions" 🤔

```
genres IN [horror, comedy]
genres = horror OR genres = comedy
```

The negated form of the above expression can be written as:

```
genres NOT IN [horror, comedy]
NOT genres IN [horror, comedy]
```

Both are equivalent and mean:

```
genres != horror AND genres != comedy
```

### `NOT`

The negation operator (`NOT`) selects all documents that do not satisfy a condition. It has higher precedence than `AND` and `OR`.

The following expression will return all documents whose `genres` does not contain `horror` and documents with a missing `genres` field:

```
NOT genres = horror
```

### `AND`

`AND` connects two conditions and only returns documents that satisfy both of them. `AND` has higher precedence than `OR`.

The following expression returns all `horror` movies directed by `Jordan Peele`:

```
genres = horror AND director = 'Jordan Peele'
```

### `OR`

`OR` connects two conditions and returns results that satisfy at least one of them.

The following expression returns either `horror` or `comedy` films:

```
genres = horror OR genres = comedy
```

## Using filters

> Suppose that your `movies_rating` dataset contains several movies in the following format:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Suppose that your `movie_ratings` dataset contains several movies in the following format:
```

]
```

After adding `director`, `release_date`, and `genres` to the [`filterableAttributes` index setting](//reference/api/settings.md#filterable-attributes), you can use them for filtering.

The following code sample returns `Avengers` movies released after 18 March 1995:

<CodeSamples id="filtering_guide_1" />

> You can also combine multiple conditions. For instance, you can limit your search so it only includes `Batman` movies directed by either `Tim Burton` or `Christopher Nolan`:

Reviewer 2: Minor, but I remember us discussing a long time ago that we perhaps should reserve "instance" for when we are discussing Meilisearch instances.

```suggestion
You can also combine multiple conditions. For example, you can limit your search so it only includes `Batman` movies directed by either `Tim Burton` or `Christopher Nolan`:
```

`lat` and `lng` must be floating point numbers indicating a geographic position. `distance_in_meters` must be an integer indicating the radius covered by the `_geoRadius` filter.

When using a <a id="downloadRestaurants" href="/restaurants.json" download="restaurants.json"> dataset of restaurants</a> containing geopositioning data, we can filter our search so it only includes places within two kilometers of our location:

<CodeSamples id="geosearch_guide_filter_usage_1" />

[You can read more about filtering results with `_geoRadius` in our geosearch guide.](/learn/advanced/geosearch.md#filtering-results-with-georadius)

### Filtering by nested fields

Use dot notation to filter results based on a document's nested fields. The following query only returns thrillers with good user reviews:

<CodeSamples id="filtering_guide_nested_1" />

> [You can read more nested fields in our guide on data types.](/learn/advanced/datatypes.md)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[You can read more about nested fields in our guide on data types.](/learn/advanced/datatypes.md)
```
